### Special Functions

#### Constructor

This concept is specific and unique to `Solidity` because it applies to smart contracts and the way they are created on Ethereum. Recall contracts on ethereum can be created from outside the blockchain via transactions, or from within the `Solidity` contracts themselves. When a contract is created, you can imagine that one would want to initialize the contract state in some manner. This is made possible by the constructor.

So the constructor is a special function that gets triggered when a contract is created. A constructor is optional and there can be only one constructor for every contract. These special functions are specified by using the `constructor` keyword; some of the syntax and semantics have changed over the course of time, but this is how it has been in the most recent versions of `Solidity`

```solidity
contract Base {
   uint data;
   constructor(uint _data) public {
      data = _data;   
   }
}
```

So constructors are used to initialize the state of a contract when they are created and deployed on the blockchain. They're triggered when a contract is created and it's run only once. Once the constructor has finished executing, the final code of the contract is stored on the blockchain and this deployed code does not include the constructor code or any of the internal functions that are called from within the constructor.

From a security perspective, constructors are very interesting because they allow one to examine what initializations are being done to the contact state because if not, the default values of the specific types of state variables are used instead. For example it could be used in the context of the various contract functions, which is an interesting and important aspect when it comes to evaluating the security of smart contracts.

#### Receive Function

Another special function in the context of `Solidity` is the `receive()` function. This function gets triggered automatically whenever there is an Ether transfer made to this contract via `send()` or `transfer()` primitives.

It also gets triggered when a transaction targets the contract but with empty `CALLDATA`. Recall that a transaction that targets a contract specifies which function needs to be called in that contract and what arguments need to be used within the data portion of the transaction, but if that data is empty then the receive function is the function that gets automatically triggered in the contract.

There can only be one `receive()` for every contract and this function cannot have any arguments, it cannot return anything and it must also have external visibility and a `payable` state mutability.

_`payable` state mutability is something we haven't discussed so far but what it specifies is that the function that has this `payable` specifier can receive Ether as part of a transaction and that applies to the receive function as well because it is triggered when Ether transfers happen._

The send and transfer primitives are designed in `Solidity` to transfer only 2300 gas. The rationale behind this was to prevent the risk, or mitigate the risk of what are known as "_reentrancy attacks_" which we'll talk more in the security chapter. This minimal amount of gas does not allow a `receive()` function to do anything much more than some basic logging (using events).

From a security context, the `receive()` function becomes interesting to evaluate because it affects the Ether balance of a contract and any assumptions in the contract logic that depends on the contract's Ether balance.

#### Fallback Function

Yet another special function in `Solidity`. It is very similar to the `receive()` function with some particularities: the `fallback()` function gets triggered automatically on a call to the contract if none of the functions in the contract match the function signature specified in the transaction. It also gets triggered if there was no data supplied at all in the transaction and there is no `receive()` function.

Similar to `receive()`, there can be only one `fallback()` for every contract, however this `fallback()` function can receive and return data if required. The visibility is `external` and if the `fallback()` function is meant to receive Ether, then it needs to have the `payable` modifier specified (similar to the `receive()` function).

The `fallback()` function cannot assume that more than 2300 gas can be supplied to it because it can be triggered via the `send` or `transfer` primitives and, similar to `receive()`, the security implications of `fallback()` have to consider that the Ether balance can be changed via this function, so any assumptions in the contract logic specific to the Ether balance need to be examined.